CHAPTER 3  
  
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS, DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES AND 
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES  
  
CONTENTS  
  
  A. Fundamentals of the Constitution  
  
3.2 
3.3  B. Vision of Socio -Economic Change  
      The Preamble  
      The Socio -Economic Agenda  
  
  
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
  
3.10 
  
3.11 C. Fundamental Rights  
      Background and Approach  
      Definition of „the State‟  
      Heads of Discrimination  
      Reservation for Minorities  
      Freedom of Press and Freedom of Information  
      Rights against Torture and Inhuman, Degrading and Cruel Treatment and 
Punishment  
      Right to Compensation for being Illegally Deprived of one‟s Right to Life or 
Liberty  
      Right to Travel Abroad and Return to one‟s Country  3.12 
3.13 
3.14  
3.15 
3.16 
3.17  
3.18 
3.19  
3.20 
  
  
3.21.1  
3.22.1  
3.23.1  
3.24       Right to Privacy  
      Right to Work  
      Preventive Detention  
      Right to Justice and Legal Aid  
      Right to Property  
      Article 31B and Ninth Schedule  
      Suspension of articles 17, 23, 24,25 and 32 during Emergency  
      Capital Punishment  
      Right to Education  
  
  
      Rights of Children  
      Right to Safe Drinking Water, Clean Environment, etc.  
      Right to Freedom of Religion  
      Special Provision Relating to Language Spoken by a Se ction of Population of a 
State  
  
  
3.25  
3.26 
3.27 
3.28 
3.29  D. Directive Principles  
      Principles of Governance  
      Justiciability and Enforceability  
      Right to Social Security and to Work  
      Right to Health  
      Right to Food and Freedom from Hunger, Clothing and Housing or Shelter  3.30 
3.31  
3.32  
3.33 
3.34 
3.35 
3.36       Right to Education  
      New Challenges to Education Policy  
      Control of Population  
      Right to Culture  
      Promotion of Inter -Religious harmony and  inter -faith values  
      Mechanism for Realization of Directive Principles  
      Credibility of Socio -Economic Data  
  
  
3.37 
3.38  
3.39 
3.40 
  E. Fundamental Duties  
      The Background  
      Usefulness of Duties  
      Spirit of Harmony and Dignity  of Women  
      Composite Culture  
  
  
  
CHAPTER 3  
  
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS, DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES  
AND FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 1  
                                                           
1[1] See also the Consultation Papers released by the Commission on “Enlargement of Fundamental Rights”  and “Effectuation 
of Fundamental Duties” in Volume II (Book 1) of this Report.  1[1] 
  
A. Fundamentals of the Constitution  
  
3.1 The Constitution which lays down the basic structure of a nation's polity is built on the 
foundations of certain fundamental values.  The vision of our founding fathers and the aims and 
objectives which they wanted to achieve through the Constitution are contained in the Preamble, 
the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles.  These three may be described as the soul 
of the Constitution and the testament of the founding fathers to the succeeding generations 
together with the later Part on Fundamental Duties.  
  
B. Vision of Socio -Economic Change  
The Preamble  
  
3.2.1  The vision of socio -economic change through the Constitution is reflected in its lofty 
Preamble.  The Preamble expresses the ideals and aspirations of a renascent India.  At 
independence, emerging out of a long period of foreign domination and oppression u nder a 
feudal system, the people were grimly struggling to be reborn into a life of dignity and hope.  
The past was heavy on their shoulders, and the future uncertain.  There was social and economic 
exploitation around. There were a whole host of social il ls such as illiteracy, superstition, sati, 
child -marriage, agrarian exploitation, child -labour, bonded labour, gender -inequality, bedeviling 
the society and polity.  
  
3.2.2         The framers of the Constitution sought to unite the vast country with its gr eat diversity of 
languages and creeds within a common bond of constitutional justice based on the great ideals of 
liberty, equality, fraternity and justice.  Framers showed an uncompromising respect for human dignity, an unquestioning commitment to equalit y and non -discrimination, and an abiding 
concern for the poor and the weak.  They made a bold attempt to base the constitutional 
foundations on the firm faith that all classes of people, followers of all faiths, and particularly the 
traditionally under -privileged should all join to work for harmony, progress, prosperity and 
nation building.  
  
3.2.3         The Preamble through its noble words promised Justice, social, economic and political; 
Liberty of thought, expression, belief, freedom of faith and worshi p; Equality of status and of 
opportunity and to promote Fraternity, assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and 
integrity of the Nation.  Speaking of the imperatives of social democracy, Dr. Ambedkar said:  
  
"it was, indeed, a way of life, wh ich recognizes liberty, equality and fraternity as the principles 
of life and which cannot be divorced from each other:  Liberty cannot be divorced from equality; 
equality cannot be divorced from liberty.  Nor can liberty and equality be divorced from 
fraternity.  Without equality, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the many.  
Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative.  Without fraternity, liberty and equality 
could not become a natural course of things."  
  
The Socio -economi c Agenda  
  
3.3.1         The scheme of the Constitution for the realisation of the socio -economic agenda 
comprises of both the justiciable Fundamental Rights as well as the non -justiciable Directive 
Principles.  The judicial contribution to the synthesis a nd the integration of the Fundamental 
Rights and the Directive Principles in the process of "constitutionalising" social and economic 
rights has been crucial to the realisation of the Directive Principles not only as a means to 
effectuate Fundamental Right s but also as a source of laws for a welfare state.  
  3.3.2         The Constitution makes it mandatory to protect and promote freedoms, and to assure 
every citizen a decent standard of living.  It makes a strong commitment to promoting the well -
being of al l citizens without any discrimination on the grounds of  caste, creed, community or 
gender.  
  
C. Fundamental Rights  
  
Background and Approach  
  
3.4.1  Constitutional guarantees for the human rights of our people were one of the persistent 
demands of our leaders throughout the freedom struggle.  By the year 1949, when the 
Constituent Assembly had completed the drafting of the Fundamental Rights Chapter, it had 
before it the „Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948.   
  
3.4.2  The International Covenant o n Civil and Political Rights,1966 (ICCPR) broadly referred 
to the inherent right to life and liberty and the right against arbitrary deprivation of those rights 
and its various aspects (Articles 6 to 14); privacy, family, etc. (Article 17); freedom of 
conscience and religion (Article 18); freedom of expression and information (Article 19); Right 
of peaceful assembly (Article 21); freedom of association (Article 22); rights of minorities 
(Article 27); etc. The International Covenant on Economic, Social and C ultural Rights, 1966  
(ICESCR ) broadly referred to the “right to work” and its various aspects (Articles 6 and 7); right 
to form trade unions for promotion of economic or social interests and the right to strike (Article 
8); right to social security and soc ial insurance (Article 9); family, marriage, children and 
mothers‟ rights (Article 10); adequate standard of living, right to food, clothing and housing, 
freedom from hunger (Article 11); physical and mental health (Article 12); education (Article 
13); com pulsory primary education (Article 14) and culture (Article 15).  The treaty obligations 
under the covenant enjoined the State Parties to ensure these rights without discrimination and 
“to take steps” to promote them “to the maximum of its available resour ces”, with a view to 
achieving “progressively” the full realisation of these rights. The Directive Principles of State 
Policy in Part IV of the Constitution are indeed the precursor to economic, social and cultural 
rights specified in the ICESCR.   
  
3.4.3  During the last three decades, a vast number of human rights have found place in new 
constitutions and bills of rights of more than eighty countries and of supra -national entities. Countries which enacted these new constitutions have had the benefit of all  the developments in 
the human rights jurisprudence which have taken place since 1950. Also, our Supreme Court has 
by judicial interpretation expanded the scope of the fundamental rights, particularly in relation to 
article 21, and this has included more c ivil and political rights which were not explicit in Part III.  
  
3.4.4  A new development is that of the principle of „basic structure‟ of the Constitution 
enunciated by the Supreme Court in 1973 in Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala 2  
1[1].  As  to what are these basic features, the debate still continues. The Supreme Court has also 
held that the scope of certain fundamental rights could be adjudged by reading into them or 
reading them not only in the light of the Directive Principles of State Po licy but also international 
covenants or conventions which were in harmony with the Fundamental Rights.  
  
3.4.5  The Commission feels that after fifty years, time is ripe to review and enlarge suitably the 
contents of some of the Fundamental Rights, particu larly those Fundamental Rights which have 
been judicially deduced.  
  
Definition of ‘the State’  
  
3.5 Fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution are, in the absence of specific 
constitutional provisions, mainly enforceable against „the State‟. The de finition of 'the State' in 
article 12 being an „inclusive‟ one, courts have ruled that where there is pervasive or 
predominant governmental control or significant involve ment in its activity, such bodies, entities 
and organizations fall within the definit ion of „the State‟.  
  
It is recommended that in article 12 of the Constitution, the following Explanation 
should be added: - 
  
„Explanation – In this article, the expression “other authorities” shall include any 
person in relation to such of its functions which are of a public nature.‟  
  
                                                           
2[1] AIR 1973 SC 1461 = 1973(4) SCC 228  Heads of discrimination  
  
3.6 In articles 15 and 16, prohibition against discrimination should be extended to 
“ethnic or social origin; political or other opinion; property or birth”.  
  
Reservation for minorities   
  
3.7.1  There was a plea on behalf of some minority communities for an express provision for 
reservation in favour of minorities both in articles 15 (4) and 16 (4). The Commission, upon due 
consideration of the representations, felt that no special provision was n ecessary inasmuch as, 
under the existing provision of articles 14, 15 and 16, it is open to the State to make reservation 
if it is of the opinion that such reservation is necessary and justified.  
  
3.7.2  The Commission noted that the ultimate aim of affirm ative action of reservation should 
be to raise the levels of capabilities of people of the disadvantaged sections and to bring them at 
par with the other sections of society.  
  
Freedom of Press and Freedom of Information  
  
3.8.1  Article 19(1)(a) refers to  „freedom of speech and expression‟.  It is proposed that the 
article must expressly include the freedom of the press and other media, the freedom to hold 
opinion and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas.  It is also proposed to amend 
article 19(2) by adding a further restriction on disclosure of information received in confidence 
except if required in public interest.  
  
The Commission recommends that article 19(1)(a) and (2) be amended to read as 
follows:  
  
“Art. 19(1):  All citizens shall have the right - (a)                                                                to freedom of speech and expression which shall 
include the freedom of the press and other media, the freedom to hold 
opinions and to seek, receive and impart information an d ideas;”.  
  
19(2):  “Nothing in sub -clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of any 
existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such law 
imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said  
sub-clause in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of 
the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, 
or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence, or 
preventing the disclo sure of information received in confidence except when 
required in public interest.”.  
  
3.8.2  A mere legislation by the Parliament by amending the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 
alone may not suffice because the power of the Supreme Court  and the High Courts to punish for 
contempt is recognized in the Constitution. Therefore, the Commission recommends that an 
appropriate proviso to article 19(2) of the Constitution may be added as under: - 
  
“Provided that, in matters of contempt, it shall be open to the Court to 
permit a defence of justification by truth on satisfaction as to the bona fides of the 
plea and it being in public interest.” . 
  
Rights against torture and inhuman, degrading and cruel treatment and punishment   
  
3.9 Torture and inhuman, degrading and cruel treatment and punishment grossly violate 
human dignity.  The Supreme Court has implied a right against torture, etc. by way of 
interpretation of article 21 which deals with the right to life and liberty.  The Univer sal 
Declaration of Human Rights 1948 and the ICCPR prohibit such acts in article 5 and article 7 
respectively.  
  It is, therefore, recommended that the existing article 21 may be re -numbered as 
clause (1) thereof, and a new clause (2) should be inserted t hereafter on the following lines: 
- 
  
“(2) No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment.”.  
  
Right to compensation for being illegally deprived of one’s right to life or liberty  
  
3.10 Article 9(5) of   the  ICCPR states, “any one who has   been   victim of unlawful arrest or 
detention shall have an enforceable right to compensation.”  In D.K. Basu vs. State of West 
Bengal 3  
1[1], the Supreme Court of India held that the reservation made by India to this clause while 
acceding to the Convention does not come in the way of the Court‟s awarding compensation in    
the cases of illegal arrest or detention. The High Courts in India have  also been awarding 
compensation.  
  
It is, therefore, recommended as under: - 
  
After clause (2) in article 21 as proposed in para 3.9, a new clause (3) should be added on 
the following lines : - 
  
“(3) Every person who has been illegally deprived of his ri ght to life or liberty 
shall have an enforceable right to compensation.”  
  
                                                           
3[1] 1997 (1) SCC 416  Right to travel abroad and return to one’s country   
  
3.11 The Supreme Court has spelt out in articles 14 and 21 the right to travel abroad and return 
to one‟s country.  Again, this right finds a place in article 13(2) of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, 1948 as well as in articles 12(2),(3) and (4) of t he ICCPR.   
  
It is, therefore, recommended that after article 21, a new article, say article 21A, 
should be inserted on the following lines :- 
  
“21A. (1) Every  person shall have the right to leave the territory of India and every citizen 
shall have the right to return to India.  
  
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the State from making any law imposing 
reasonable restrictions in the interests of the soverei gnty and integrity of India, 
friendly relations of India with foreign States and interests of the general public.”  
  
Right to Privacy  
  
3.12 The Supreme Court has included 4  
1[1] „Right to Privacy‟ in the Right to „Life‟ under article 21.  
  
It is, therefore, proposed that a new article, namely, article 21 -B, should be inserted 
on the following lines:  
  
                                                           
4[1] Kharak Singh v. State of U.P., AIR 1963 SC 1295:  R. Rajagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1994 (6) SCC 632.  “21-B. (1)   Every person has a right to respect for his private and family life, his 
home and his correspondence.  
  
(2)    Nothing in clause (1) shal l prevent the State from making any law imposing 
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred  by clause (1), in the 
interests of security of the State, public safety  or for the prevention of disorder 
or crime, or for the protection of  health or morals, or for the protection of the 
rights and freedoms of others.  
  
Right to Work  
  
3.13.1  It is in the rural sector that widespread poverty, underemployment, malnutrition, lack of 
access to healthcare and oppressive social customs that bear down heavily on women and 
children create a social landscape of appalling misery.  It is here that a major action plan has to 
be launched to create additional jobs, to enhance incomes of those at the bottom rung of the 
social ladder and to create the physi cal and social infrastructure of a vibrant economy.  
  
3.13.2 The Commission, therefore, recommends that a new article,  say article 21 -C, may be 
added to make it obligatory on the State to bring suitable legislation for ensuring the right 
to rural wage emp loyment for a minimum of eighty days in a year.  
  
Preventive Detention  
  
3.14.1    Article 22 (3)(b) permits „preventive detention‟ and the rule in clause (2) of article 22 
which requires production before the nearest magistrate within 24 hours does not al so apply in 
such cases. No doubt, several preventive detention laws have been upheld by the courts.  But, 
being detention without trial, there is a view that such a detention is a negation of the rule of law 
and the principles of fair trial.  The arrest is  supposed to be made on the basis of information that 
the person is likely to commit some serious offences.  There are complaints that this law is 
misused quite frequently.  
  3.14.2  While the Commission does not propose to recommend deletion of clauses dealing with 
preventive detention under article 22, it recommends the following changes : - 
  
(i) The first and second provisos and Explanation to article 22(4) as contained in 
section 3  of the Constitution (44th Amendment) Act, 1978 should be substituted by the 
following provisos and the said section 3 of the 1978 Act as amended by the proposed 
legislation should be brought into force within a period of not exceeding three months : - 
  
 “Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two 
other members, and the Chairman and the other members of the Board shall be serving 
judges of any High Court  :  
  
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall authoriz e the detention of any person beyond a 
maximum period of six months as may be prescribed by any law made by Parliament under sub -
clause(a) of clause (7)”.  
  
(ii) In clause (7) of article 22 of the Constitution, in sub -clause (b), for the words “the 
maximum  period”, the words “the maximum period not exceeding six months” shall be 
substituted.  
  
Right to justice and legal aid  
  
3.15.1  The Commission recommends that after article 30, the following article should be 
added as article 30A:  
  
“30A: Access to Courts and Tribunals and speedy justice  (1) Everyone has a right to have any dispute that can be resolved by the application 
of law decided in a fair public hearing before an independent court or, where 
appropriate, another independent and impartial tribun al or forum.  
  
(2) The right to access to courts shall be deemed to include the right to reasonably 
speedy and effective justice in all matters before the courts, tribunals or other fora  
and the State shall take all reasonable steps to achieve the said object.”  
  
3.15.2  Legal aid is essential for effective implementation of the various rights included in Part 
III to help the needy and the indigent. The Commission recommends that article 3 9A in Part 
IV  be shifted to Part III as a new article 30B to read as under: - 
  
“39B.  Equal justice and free legal aid: The State shall secure that the operation of 
the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in 
particul ar, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other 
way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen 
by reason of economic or other disabilities.”  
  
Right to property  
  
3.16.1  After the 44th Amendment of the Constitution, right to property has ceased to be a 
fundamental right.  Under article 300A, it has become a constitutional right. One other important 
aspect is with regard to deprivation or acquisition of agricultural and homestead land belon ging 
to weaker sections. Before such deprivation takes place , the persons so deprived must be 
provided lands of quality as nearly as may be  equal to the lands such persons were previously 
occupying or otherwise adequately rehabilitated.  
  
3.16.2  The Commis sion recommends that article 300 -A should be recast as follows: - 
  
“300 -A  (1) Deprivation or acquisition of property shall be by authority of law and 
only for a public purpose.    
(2) There shall be no arbitrary deprivation or acquisition of property:  
  
Provided that no deprivation or acquisition of agricultural, forest and non -
urban homestead land belonging to or customarily used by the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes shall take place except by authority of law which provides 
for suitable rehabi litation scheme before taking possession of such land.”  
  
  
Article 31B and Ninth Schedule  
  
3.17 A number of enactments unrelated to the rationale underlying articles 31B have come to 
be included in the Ninth Schedule with a view to keep them secure from  attack on the ground 
that such enactment or a provision thereof is inconsistent with any provision of Part III of the 
Constitution.  In the Consultation Paper 5  
1[1] on „Enlargement of Fundamental Rights‟, it was proposed that article 31B be suitably 
amen ded to provide that the laws to be included in the Ninth Schedule must, in pith and 
substance, relate to agrarian reforms or land reforms or laws to give effect to the directive 
principles in article 39(b) and 39(c).  After further discussion, the Commissi on recommends 
that in article 31 -B, the following proviso should be added at the end, namely : - 
  
“Provided that the protection afforded by this article to Acts and Regulations 
which may be hereafter specified in the Ninth Schedule or any of the provisions  
thereof, shall not apply unless such Acts or Regulations relate – 
  
(a)           in pith and substance to agrarian reforms or land reforms;  
(b)          to reasonable quantum of reservation under articles 15 and 16;  
(c)           to provisions for giving ef fect to the policy of the State towards 
securing all or any of the principles specified in clause (b) or clause (c) 
of article 39.”  
                                                           
5[1] See Volume II (Book 1) of the Report.    
Suspension of articles 17, 23, 24, 25 and 32 during emergency  
  
3.18.1  Article 359 deals with “Suspension of the enforceme nt of the rights conferred by Part III 
during emergencies”. Clause (1) permits suspension of the right to move court but excludes 
article 20 (retrospectivity of law relating to offences, double jeopardy and self -incrimination) and 
article 21 (Life and libe rty not to be deprived except according to procedure established by law 
which after Maneka Gandhi‟s case 6  
1[1] means fair, reasonable and just procedure).  
  
3.18.2   The Commission recommends that clauses (1) and (1A) of article 359 should be 
amended by su bstituting for “(except articles 20 and 21)”, the following -  
  
“(except articles 17,20,21,23,24,25 and 32)”  
  
Capital Punishment   
  
3.19 Section 121 of the Indian Penal Code permits death sentence or life imprisonment to be 
imposed for the offences of waging war against the Government of India, or attempts to wage 
such a war or abetment of such a war.  The Commission, after due deliberations, has not thought 
it appropriate to recommend, at this stage, any change in the existing law relating to impositio n 
of death penalty.  
  
Right to Education  
  
3.20.1  At the time when the Commission released its Consultation Paper on the subject, 
Constitution (93rd Amendment) Bill was under consideration.  But the proposed Amendment 
covers the Right to Free and Compulsor y Education only between the years 6 and 14 years. The 
                                                           
6[1] AIR 1978 SC 597  Commission is of the view that the Right to Free and Compulsory Education should also be 
extended to the children upto the age of fourteen years and that the right to education  beyond the 
age of 14 yea rs may depend upon the economic capacity and the stage of development of the 
State.   
  
3.20.2  The Commission feels that the constitutional commitment for free and compulsory 
education for all children until the age of fourteen should under no circumstance s be 
diluted and the State should fulfill this solemn obligation to the nation.  The responsibility 
for the universalisation of elementary education should be entrusted to Panchayats and 
local self government institutions.  It is recommended that the relev ant provisions in the 
Constitution (93rd Amendment) Bill, 2001 making the right to education of children from 
six years till the completion of fourteen years as a Fundamental Right should be amended 
and enlarged to read as under: -  
  
“30-C Every child shall have the right to free education until he completes the age of 
fourteen years; and in the case of girls and members of the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes, until they complete the age of eighteen years.”.  
  
Rights of Children  
  
3.21.1  Artic le 39(e) in the Directive Principles in Part IV refers to the duty of the State to direct 
its policy to see that children of tender age are not abused.  Article 39 (f) refers to a similar duty 
on the State to give opportunities and facilities to children t o develop in a healthy manner and 
with dignity and in conditions which are free and where childhood and youth are protected 
against exploitation and moral and material abandonment.  
  
3.21.2 The Commission recommends that the following article should be add ed - 
  
“Art. 24A.  Every child shall have the right to care and assistance in basic needs and 
protection from all forms of neglect, harm and exploitation.”  
  
Right to safe drinking water,  clean environment, etc.    
3.22.1 Gandhiji  had once said that freedom for him would mean the availability of safe drinking 
water to every person in every village of India.  This has still not become a reality.   
  
3.22.2  Right to healthy environment and its protection and the right to development are group -
rights and are loosely described as „third generation rights‟.  The right to sustainable 
development has been declared by the UN General Assembly as an inalienable human right 7  
1[1]. The Declaration recognizes that „human being is the central su bject of the development 
process and that the development policy shall make the human being the main participant and 
beneficiary of development‟.    “Development” is defined as a „comprehensive economic, social, 
cultural and political process, which aims a t the constant improvement of the well being of the 
entire population in development and in the fair distribution of benefits therefrom 8[1].  The Rio 
Conference of 1992 declared human beings as centres  of concern for sustainable development.  
Human beings are, it is said, entitled to a healthy and protective life in harmony with nature 
(Principle 1).  “In order to achieve „sustainable development‟ environmental protection shall 
constitute an integral pa rt of the development process and cannot be considered in isolation of 
it”.  The 1997 Earth Summit meeting of 100 nations in New York affirmed these principles 9[2].  
  
3.22.3  The Commission recommends that after the proposed article 30 -C, the following 
article may be added as article 30 -D :- 
  
“Art. 30 -D.  Right to safe drinking water , prevention of pollution, conservation of 
ecology and sustainable development. - 
  
Every person shall have the  right –  
(a) to safe drinking water;  
(b) to an environment that  is not harmful to one‟s health or well -being; and  
                                                           
7[1] See Declaration on the Right to Development, 1986.  
8[1] Development, Human Rights, etc. by. S.K. Verma, vol. 40, 1998 JILI, pp. 217 to 229.  
9[2] A.P. Pollution Control Board vs Prof. M.V. Nay udu [2001 (2) SCC 62].  (c) to have the environment protected, for the benefit of present and future 
generations so as to –  
(i)        prevent pollution and ecological degradation;  
(ii)       promote conservation; and  
(iii)     secure ecologically sustainable development and use of natural 
resources while promoting justifiable economic and social 
development.”.  
  
Right to Freedom of Religion   
  
3.23.1  A number of institutions of Sikhs and Buddhists suggested certain changes in article 
25(2).  Explanation II to article 25 provides that reference to Hindus in sub -clause (b) of clause 
(2) should be construed as including a reference to Sikhs etc.  
  
3.23.2  The Commission, without going into the larger issue on which the contention is 
based, is of the opinion that the purpose of the representations would be served if 
Explanation II to article 25 is omitted and sub -clause (b) of clause (2) of that article is 
reworded as follows: - 
  
“(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu, Sikh, 
Jaina or Buddhist religious institutions of a public character to all classes and 
sections of these religions.”  
  
Special provision relating to langua ge spoken by a section of population of a State  
  
3.24 In order to make the rights available to minorities under articles 29 and 30 meaningful, 
the Commission feels that the provisions contained under article 347 need some modification.  
Before the Preside nt directs that use of any language spoken by a section of the population of a 
State be recognized in a State for such purposes as he may specify, he has to ensure that a 
substantial proportion of the population of that State so desires.  The explanation “ substantial 
proportion of the population” had been a subject matter of controversy and different constructions have been placed up on it.  It shall be desirable that some optimum level of 
population with a view to take necessary action under this constitut ional provision is 
prescribed.  In article 347 of the Constitution, for the words “a substantial proportion of 
the population”, the words “not less than ten per cent of the population” should be 
substituted . 
  
D. Directive Principles  
  
Principles of Governance  
  
3.25.1     It is only during the last two or three decades that there has been a perceptible shift in 
intellectual discourse in the academia towards problems and principles of good governance as 
contradistinguished from issues of government and  politics.  Our founding fathers, however, 
were far -sighted people.  They realised even in the late 1940s the difference and in article 37 
specifically spoke of certain "principles" being "fundamental" in the "governance of the 
country".  Also, the State w as enjoined "to apply these principles in making laws."  
  
3.25.2    The founding fathers were conscious of the fact that mere political democracy, i.e., 
getting the right to vote once in five years or so was meaningless unless it was accompanied by 
social a nd economic democracy.  Political equality was not possible unless men were made equal 
on the social and economic plane as well.  Right to vote for a hungry and illiterate man without 
clothing and shelter meant little.  Dr. Ambedkar had said:  
  
 "We do not  want merely to lay down a mechanism to enable people to come and capture 
power.  The Constitution also wishes to lay down an ideal before those who would be 
forming the government.  That ideal is of economic democracy."  
  
3.25.3   The Supreme Court has, i n a number of judgements, referred to the importance of the 
Directive Principles.  It has called these principles the “conscience” of the Constitution and also 
as the core of the Constitution.  These principles are the “goals” to be achieved by Part III of  the 
Constitution.  They are intended to ensure “distributive justice” for removal of inequalities and 
disabilities and to achieve a fair division of wealth amongst the members of the society.  The 
Supreme Court held that the courts can look at the Directi ve Principles for the purpose of 
interpretation of the fundamental rights.  The courts will adopt that interpretation which makes the fundamental rights meaningful and efficacious. The courts have to make every attempt to 
reconcile the fundamental rights w ith the Directive Principles remembering that the reason why 
the Directive Principles were left by the founding fathers as non -enforceable was to give the 
Government sufficient latitude to implement them.   
  
3.25.4  The Directive Principles are indeed the  precursor to the Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights specified in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966 
(ICESCR).  They reflect the consensus on the intrinsic necessity of these means and envisage 
State action which wou ld facilitate the transfer and distribution of power -- leading to 
transmission of power to the citizens and this is loosely called “empowerment” of the people.  
Democracy will become real when in practice there is sharing of power and responsibility by al l 
sections of the people and it becomes illusory when it is about pursuit of power by the dominant 
sections alone.  The Directive Principles cannot be confined to mere rhetoric or to ad hoc 
policies of electoral appeasement or handouts.   
  
3.25.5  The com parable provisions of the Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the 
Constitution of India and the ICESCR are given below : -  
  
Articles of the Constitution  Articles of ICESCR  
Article 39  Articles 3, 6 (1) and 7  
Article 41  Article 6 and 7  
Article 42  Articles 7 and 10.2  
Article 43  Articles 11 (1), 11(2) and 15  
Article 45  Articles 13 (1), (2)(a), (3) and (4) and 14  
Article 47  Articles 12(1), (2), (a) to (d)  
Article 51  Articles 1.3 and 2 (1)  
  
3.25.6  The  concept of a division among human rights is no longer accepted in contemporary 
human rights discourse.  Further, recent constitutional changes in the East European states have 
set at naught some of the reasons for the divide.  Again, the description of th e Civil and Political 
rights as „negative‟ rights which prohibit the State from interfering with rights of the individuals 
and the description of the Economic, Social and Cultural rights as „positive‟ rights which require 
affirmative action by the State is  not accepted by jurists any longer. The theory that the former 
rights are justiciable and the latter rights are not justiciable has not also been accepted by scholars.  The existence of any basis for such division is described as a 'myth' and inaccurate 
generalization 10  
1[1]. 
  
3.25.7  The Vienna World Conference on Human Rights, 1993 reaffirmed that the Civil, Political 
and the Economic, Social and Cultural Rights are „universal, interdependent and indivisible.‟ 
The European Social Charter 1961 (revised c harter 1996) and Protocols; the American 
Convention on Human Rights, 1969 (effective from 1978); the African Charter of Human Rights 
and Peoples‟ Rights, 1981 (effective from 1986) and finally the Human Rights Act, 1998 (UK) 
(which incorporates several pro visions of the European Convention) and the South African 
Convention, 1996 deal with Civil, Political and Economic, Social and Cultural Rights covering 
the whole gamut of rights.  
  
3.25.8  The Father of the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi stated in the Second Roun d Table Conference 
in London, long before the UN Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 that his aim was "to establish 
a political society in India in which there would be no distinction between high class of people 
and low class of people, that women should en joy the same rights as men; and dignity, justice, 
social, economic and political, would be ensured to the teeming millions of India.”  
  
3.25.9    In the Annual Report of the National Human Rights Commission 1997 -98, this is what 
is stated about our country:  
  
“It is said that one third of the world‟s poor are Indians, who lacked clean drinking 
water, basic sanitation and minimum standards of health care, food and 
nutrition….Persistence of such a situation constitutes a failure of governance which had 
urgently to be remedied for it is on the pillars of good governance that promotion of 
human rights in the final analysis rests.”  
  
Justiciability and Enforceability  
                                                           
10[3] See vols. 18 to 21 of Human Rights Quarterly for a  number of articles; ‟International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights‟ by Mathew Craven (1995); Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, edited by Ralph Baddard 199;  special issue on 
these rights by International Commission of Jurists, 1995; International Human Rights Context, 2nd Ed. Henry Steiner and Phil ip 
Alston, 1999.    
3.26.1  The judiciary is not suited, according to several writers to enforce some of the ICESCR 
rights. Where the resources of the nation are involved and a question of priority arises, the 
remedy cannot be judicial.  However, the concept here is not “justiciability” at the instance of 
individuals in courts of law, but the concept is one of “e nforceability” which means that the State 
must “recognize”, and “take steps”, by adopting “legislative” or other measures for the “full 
realisation” and “to the maximum of the State's available resources, both “individually and 
through international assist ance and co -operation”.  These are the words actually used by the 
ICESCR and have been the subject matter of voluminous literature.  These rights are described 
as “entitlements” of the people and give rise to “obligations” on the part of the State parties.   The 
enforcement must first be of the “minimum core obligations” as stated in Para 10 of the General 
Comment No.3 of 1990 of the U.N. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.   
  
3.26.2   It is felt that an appropriate mechanism must be devised to oblige the State to take action 
step by step and progressively for the realisation of these rights to the maximum within the 
resources of the State.  
  
3.26.3  The Commission recommends that the heading of Part IV of the Constitution 
should be amended to read as “DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY AND 
ACTION”.  
  
Right to Social Security and to Work  
  
3.27.1   Article 41 directs the State to make effective provision for securing the right to work, to 
education and to public assistance in cases of unemploym ent, old age, sickness and disablement, 
and in other cases of undeserved want.  This is social security in its widest sense.  It is a measure 
of the distance the country still has to travel to build a good society.  The present situation, as 
revealed by su ccessive UNDP reports, is one of hardship and deprivation for very large sections 
of our people.  Poverty eradication continues to be a major challenge for social and economic 
policy.  The „trickle -down‟ theory did not work but neither did the direct anti -poverty 
programmes.     
3.27.2 Safety nets like the Public Distribution System (PDS), the Integrated Rural Development 
Programmes, and the targeted programmes for women and children have also not had the 
measure of success that was hoped for.  Even the ste p up in growth rates following the 
introduction of the new economic strategy of liberalization has not succeeded in generating 
substantial increases in employment  that alone would reduce poverty and increase the sense of 
security among the people.  It is clear that a many -sided approach has to be developed to increase 
growth rates, to structure labour intensive projects spread through the length and breadth of the 
country and to help the vulnerable sections of the people to take advantage of government 
programmes intended for their welfare.  
  
3.27.3  The Commission, therefore, recommends the initiation of a strategic Plan of Action 
to create a large number of employment opportunities in five years to realize and exploit 
the enormous potential in creating suc h employment opportunities.  The components of 
this plan may include:  
  
(1)       Improvement of productivity in agriculture that will activate a chain of 
activities towards increased income and employment opportunities.  
(2)       Integrated horticulture that will include production of fruits, vegetables and 
flowers, cut -flowers for export and medicinal plants as well as establishment of 
bio-processing industries aimed primarily at value -addition of agricultural 
products.  
(3)       Intensification of animal  husbandry programs and production of quality dairy 
products.  
(4)       Integrated Program of Intensive Aquaculture including use of common 
property resources like village ponds and lakes.  
(5)       Afforestation and Wasteland Development to bring an additio nal 12 million 
hectares under forest plantation and contribute to rural asset building activity.  
(6)       Soil and Water Conservation to support afforestation and Natural Resource 
Conservation towards eco -friendly agriculture.  
(7)       Water Conservation a nd Tank Rehabilitation.  
(8)       Production and use of organic manures through vermiculture and other 
improved techniques and production of organic health foods from them.    
3.27.4   The State should provide opportunity to every person to gain his living by  work which 
he freely chooses or accepts – which shall include the technical and vocational guidance and 
training programmes, polices and techniques to achieve steady economic, social and cultural 
development and full and productive employment under condit ions safeguarding fundamental 
political and economic freedom to the individual.  The right to work does not mean that 
everybody is to be employed by the State. It only means that the State has to develop 
“employment opportunities” both in the public and pr ivate sector 11  
1[1]. 
  
3.27.5   The resource requirement for the implementation of this plan can be met by integrating 
the plethora of government programmes and changing their focus towards employment 
generation and income enhancing activities.  Institution ally, this plan of action can succeed only 
if programmes are people -oriented and developed in a participatory mode.  A change in mindset 
where people are regarded as “partners in development” rather than “beneficiaries” is necessary.  
  
3.27.6  The foregoing  considerations suggest a complete change in emphasis insofar as growth 
strategy is concerned.  What is important is how work, productive work, will enhance incomes 
for the individual and the community.  It is essential to make a beginning toward making th e 
right to work the integral component of growth and development strategy.  The Commission has 
carefully examined the relevant economic data on the subject and has come to the conclusion 
that a realistic approach to the right to work is not only desirable,  it is entirely feasible.   
  
Right to Health  
  
3.28.1  The right to health has been treated by the Supreme Court as part of the right to „life‟ in 
article 21 12  
1[1]. But, the right to health is not a right to be „healthy‟.  It means a right both to certain 
„freedoms‟ and „entitlements‟.  The freedoms include the right to control ones‟ health and body, 
                                                           
11[3] Chapter V on „Right to Work‟ by Mathew Craven in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 
1995, p.199 to 225; Human Rights and World of Work by Kamala Sankaran, vol. 40, 1998 JILI, pp. 284 to 294.  
12[3] State of Punjab v. Mahinder  Singh Chawla, AIR 1997 SC 1225.  including sexual and reproductive freedom and the right to be f ree from interference, such as by 
non-consensual medical treatment and experimentation.  Entitlements include a right to a system 
of health protection with equality of opportunity to enjoy the highest attainable level of health – a 
right to the enjoyment a nd availability of facilities, good services and conditions such as physical 
accessibility, economic accessibility and information accessibility.  It must be qualitative and  
should include the right to healthy working conditions and preventive medicine.  
  
3.28.2  The State has to “respect, protect and fulfill" its obligations in these areas for children, 
adults and those in old age 13  
1[1].  As of today, free medical treatment in government hospitals is totally inadequate.  Nor is it 
available always in clo se neighbourhood.  It is not possible to deal extensively with the pathetic 
conditions of medical care provided by government hospitals in our country.  It is a fact of life 
that the poorer and weaker sections of society are unable to afford the extraordin ary expense 
involved in the medical care provided by private hospitals. There is, therefore, an urgent need to 
see that, progressively, the State allocates adequate funds in this behalf 14[3]. 
  
Right to Food and Freedom from Hunger, Clothing and Housing  or  Shelter  
  
3.29.1    The State must recognize the right of everyone to an adequate standard of living for 
himself and his family, including adequate food, clothing and housing and to the continuous 
improvement of living conditions; the State shall also hav e to recognize  the right of everyone to 
be free from hunger .  It shall then have to initiate programmes to improve methods of 
production, conservation and distribution of food by making full use of technical and scientific 
knowledge, by disseminating know ledge of the principles of nutrition and by developing or 
reforming agrarian system in such a way as to achieve the most efficient development and 
utilization of natural resources; and to take into account, the problem of both food -importing and 
                                                           
13[3] See General comment No. 14 , 22nd Session of Committee on ICESCR Rights (IHRR, Vol. 8, No. 1 (2001), p.1.  
14[3] Chapter X in „Right to Health‟ on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights by Ralpt Beddard, & Dilys‟ Hill, 199 2; „Towards 
an Improved Understanding of the International Human Right to Health by Brigit Toebes, vol. 21, (1999), Human Rights 
Quarterly, pp.661 to 679, for a detailed discussions.  food-expor ting countries and to ensure an equitable distribution of world food supplies in 
relation to need.  
  
3.29.2 It is well -known that while the godowns of the Food Corpo ration of India are overflowing 
and even rotting with excess food grains, there are report s of starvation deaths across the 
country. Further, quite a good percent age of food grains are lost due to inadequate conservation 
and also during distribution.  This must be avoided by introducing proper systems.  
  
3.29.3 The State must ensure right to housing or shelter.  The Government of India formulated 
the National Housing Policy 1988, 1994, and the National Housing and Habitat Policy, 1998. 
There are various schemes for weaker sections, slum developments, etc. 15  
1[1]. As already stated, this right has been recognized by the Supreme Court of India as part of 
the right to life under article 21 16[4]. 
  
3.29.4 The Commission is convinced that the realization of the right to food, clothing and 
housing requires the State to prepare long range and short ran ge plans for proper allocation of 
necessary funds.  
  
Right to Education  
  
3.30.1  Article 45 under the Directive Principles had envisaged free and compulsory education 
within ten years for all children till the age of 14. The national goal of universalisation of 
elementary education has still not been reached.  Education for all remains an objective with the 
target date being pushed forward after every review.  Increase in literacy rates to 72 per cent by 
2007 and to 80 per cent by 2012, and un iversal access to primary education by 2007, have been 
set as goals in the approach paper to the Tenth Plan.  
                                                           
15[4] Right to Shelter, A Human Rights Perspective, by Prafulla C. Mishra,  vol. 40 (1998), JILI, pp. 230 to 242.    
16[4] UP Avas Avam Vikas Parishad v. Friends Co -operative Housing Society Ltd ., AIR 1996 SC 114.     
3.30.2 It should also be laid down in article 45 that the State shall make provision for 
education beyond the age of fourteen years within the li mits of its economic capacity and 
stage of development.  
  
New Challenges to Education Policy  
  
3.31.1  We live in an age of rapid social, economic and technological change.  Educational policy 
and programmes have to reflect the changed requirements in conte nt and techniques of delivery. 
There has been a paradigm shift from a teaching to a learning process.  Information and 
communication technology have to be harnessed to the goal of achieving education for all.  The 
need for autonomy, continuous review, flex ibility and clarity have to be built into policy.  The 
educational system should impart moral and ethical values essential for good citizenship.   
  
3.31.2  Autonomy for the education budget should be ensured.  Some sanctity should be attached 
to the core provisions, such as teachers‟ salaries.  There is a strong case for constitutional 
protection for the service conditions of teachers.  Moreover, there is need to insulate educational 
institutions from needless litigation.  
  
3.31.3  The Commission recommends  that an independent National Education Commission 
should be set up every five years to report to Parliament on the progress of the 
constitutional directive regarding compulsory education and on other aspects relevant to 
the knowledge society of the new ce ntury. The model of the Finance Commission may be 
usefully looked into.  
  Control of Population  
  
3.32 The Commission noted with concern that proper planning and monitoring of the 
socio -economic development of the country is considerably hampered and neut ralized by 
the exponential growth of population.   
  
The Commission, therefore, recommends that the following article should be added as a directive 
principle of state policy after article 47 of the Constitution:  
  
“Art. 47A.  Control  of Population: - The State shall endeavour to secure control of 
population by means of education and implementation of small family norms.”  
  
  
Right to Culture  
  
3.33.1 Article 49 of the Directive Principles requires the State to protect monuments and 
places and objects of national importance.  For the purpose of protecting culture in all its 
facets and in developing it, the State has to set apart necessary resources.  
  
3.33.2  More than five decades of experience with the working of our Constitution and t he 
laws has borne out that democracy in a meaningful sense, depends on a pluralistic ethos 
permeating the polity.  Our national life must be accommodative of the myriad 
variegations that make up the unique mosaic of India's society.  The framework of our 
many and elaborate structures of government must exemplify the architecture of an 
inclusive society and one of the means is to promote civil society initiatives for inter -
religions and social harmony.    
3.33.3 All considered, as advised by experience and by  present and emerging needs, it is felt 
that a mechanism may be brought into being which can advance the cause of inter -faith 
harmony and solidarity.  This can be done under the auspices of the National Human 
Rights Commission.  
  
Promotion of Inter -Religio us harmony and inter -faith values  
  
3.34.1 Past experience indicates that in sensitive areas and localities of the country where inter -
religious conflicts have sprung up out of trivial incidents resulting in conflagration, extensive 
damage to life and property.  The setting up of “ Mohalla  Committees” with the participation of 
prominent members of different communities to take note of early warning symptoms and 
alerting the administration in preventing them have produced enduring beneficial results.  In 
particular, the endeavours made in Bhiwandi, in the State of Maharashtra, after the tragic riots 
there, have emphasised the value of such measures.   
  
3.34.2  The Commission, therefore, recommends the setting up of an inter -faith mechanism 
to promote such civil society initiatives. In the Commission‟s view, this can be done under 
the auspices of the National Human Rights Commission set up under section 3 of the 
Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993  which, inter alia, provides for the participation of “the 
Chairpersons of the National Commission for Minorities, the National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the National Commission for Women” who shall be 
deemed to be the Members of the Commission for the discharge of functions specified in clauses 
(b) to (j) of the section 12 of the said Act.  The Chairpersons of the National Commission for 
Backward Classes and National Commission for Safai Karamcharis should be co -opted to this 
body.  This body could, in addition to its other statutory f unctions, also function as mechanism 
for promotion of inter -religious harmony. With an appropriate statutory enablement by way of 
enlargement of section 12 of the said Act, the purpose could be achieved without additional 
expenditure for setting up a separ ate mechanism. Section 12 of the said Act could be 
amended by the addition of clause (k), which shall read as under:  
  
“(k) promoting through civil society initiatives, inter -faith and   inter -religious 
harmony and social solidarity”.  
  By this simple statutory enablement, with consequential amendment in Section 3(3) , the 
Chairpersons of all the aforesaid Commissions who meet and interact would, in collaboration 
with the National Foundation for Communal Harmony (established under the Mini stry of Home 
Affairs, Government of India), would be able to oversee the installation and working of 
“Mohalla  Committees” and other civil society initiatives in sensitive areas which particularly 
require promotion of inter -faith harmony .  
Mechanism for rea lisation of Directive Principles  
  
3.35.1 The State should devise appropriate mechanisms for realisation of Directive Principles. 
The Commission does not propose to recommend a complaints procedure inasmuch as it is more 
concerned with a procedure which wi ll ensure proper allocation of resources for the realization 
of the right to work, health, food, clothing, housing, education and culture. Domestic bodies in 
various countries have different composition, membership and powers.  
  
3.35.2   In the view of th e Commission, there must be a body of high status which first 
reviews the state of the level of implementation of the Directive Principles and Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights and in particular (i) the right to work, (ii) the right to health, 
(iii) the  right to food, clothing and shelter, (iv) Right to Education upto and beyond the 14th 
year, and (v) the Right to C ulture .  The said body must estimate the extent of resources 
required in each State under each of these heads and make recommendations for al location of 
adequate resources, from time to time.  For ensuring that the Directive Principles of State Policy 
are realized more effectively, the following procedure is suggested: - 
  
(i)           The Planning Commission shall ensure that there is special 
mention/emphasis in all the plans and schemes formulated by it, on the 
effectuation/realization of the Directive Principles of State Policy.  
(ii)          Every Ministry/Department of the Government of India shall make a special 
annual report indicating the  extent of effectuation/realization of the Directive 
Principles of State Policy, the shortfall in the targets, the reasons for the 
shortfall, if any, and the remedial measures taken to ensure their full 
realization, during the year under report.  (iii)        The report under item (ii) shall be considered and discussed by the 
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee, which shall submit 
its report on the working of the Department indicating the 
achievements/failures of the Ministry/Department along with its 
recommendations thereto.  
(iv)        Both the above Reports i.e. (ii) and (iii) above shall be discussed by the 
Planning Commission in an interactive seminar with the representatives of 
various NGOs, Civil Society Groups, etc. in which the represen tatives of the 
Ministry/Department and the Departmental Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee would also participate. The report of this interaction shall be 
submitted to the Parliament within a time bound manner.  
(v)       The Parliament shall discuss t he report at (iv) above within a period of three 
months and pass a resolution about the action required to be taken by the 
Ministry/Department.  
  
3.35.3 A similar mechanism as mentioned above may be adopted for the States.  
  
Credibility of Socio -economic Data  
  
3.36  The Report of the National Statistical Commission (2001) stresses the importance of 
availability of adequate, credible and timely socio -economic data generated by the 
statistical system, both for policy formulation and for monitoring progress of the secto rs of 
economy and pace of socio -economic change. The Commission endorses the 
recommendations of the National Statistical Commission and stresses the importance of 
their implementation.  
  
  
E. Fundamental Duties  
The Background   
  3.37.1  Ten Fundamental Duties of the citizen are incorporated in article 51A, Part IVA of the 
Constitution. Inserted by the Constitution (Forty -second Amendment) Act, 1976 it was part of a 
large number of changes brought about during the Emergency.  But after the  end of the 
Emergency, when the new Parliament reviewed the whole position and in most cases restored the 
pre-emergency position, article 51A was one that emerged unscathed because it was considered 
by all parties to be an unexceptionable charter of princi ples which citizens could usefully absorb 
and practice.  
  
3.37.2   Constitutions of some countries of the world contain provisions for Fundamental Duties. 
The inclusion of Fundamental Duties in our Constitution also brings it in line with Article 29(1) 
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which says:  “Everyone has the duties to the 
community in which alone the free and full development of the personality is possible.”  
Exercise of fundamental rights entails duties to the community which ensures the  free and full 
development of human personality.  
  
3.37.3    In the last quarter -century since the Amendment, several judgments of High Courts and 
the Supreme Court have quoted these Fundamental Duties, where applicable, to lend further 
support to their dec isions.  
  
3.37.4  A consultation paper on the subject of “Effectuation of Fundamental Duties” prepared for 
the Commission by the Citizenship Development Society was circulated for eliciting public 
opinion.  Responses received were carefully examined by the  Commission along with the report 
of the Justice Verma Committee on Fundamental Duties.  
  
3.37.5   The Government of India appointed the committee “to operationalise the suggestions to 
teach Fundamental Duties to the citizens of India” in the year 1998 und er the chairmanship of 
Justice J.S. Verma.  The Committee submitted its report in October 1999.  The Commission feels 
that it is, therefore, not necessary for it to cover the same ground again.  It finds itself in full 
agreement with the report of the Verm a Committee. The salient recommendations of the 
Committee are at Annexure 1 17  
1[1] to the Consultation Paper on “Effectuation of Fundamental Duties of Citizens”.  
  
Usefulness of Duties   
                                                           
17[5] See Volume II (Book 1) of the Report.    
3.38.1  Fundamental Duties of citizens serve a useful purpose. In particular, no democratic polity 
can ever succeed where the citizens are not willing to be active participants in the process of 
governance by assuming responsibilities and discharging citizenship d uties and coming forward 
to give their best to the country.  Some of the fundamental duties enshrined in article 51A have 
been incorporated in separate laws. For instance, the first duty includes respect for the National 
Flag and the National Anthem. Disre spect is punishable by law.  To value and preserve the rich 
heritage of the mosaic that is India should help to weld our people into one nation but much more 
than article 51A will be needed to treat all human beings equally, to respect each religion and to  
confine it to the private sphere and not make it a bone of contention between different 
communities of this land. In sum, the Commission believes that article 51A has travelled a great 
distance since it was introduced in the Forty -second Amendment and fur ther consideration 
should be given to ways and means to popularise the knowledge and content of the Fundamental 
Duties and effectuate them.   
  
3.38.2    The most important task before us is to reconcile the claims of the individual citizen and 
those of the  civic society.  To achieve this, it is important to orient the individual citizen to be 
conscious of his social and citizenship responsibilities and so shape the society that we all 
become solicitous and considerate of the inalienable rights of our fellow  citizens.  Therefore, 
awareness of our citizenship duties is as important as awareness of our rights.  Every right 
implies a corresponding duty but every duty does not imply a corresponding right.  Man does not 
live for himself alone.  He lives for the go od of others as well as of himself.  It is this knowledge 
of what is right and wrong that makes a man responsible to himself and to the society and this 
knowledge is inculcated by imbibing and clearly understanding one‟s citizenship duties.  The 
fundamenta l duties are the foundations of human dignity and national character.  If every citizen 
performs his duties irrespective of considerations of caste, creed, colour and language, most of 
the malaise of the present day polity could be contained, if not eradic ated, and the society as a 
whole uplifted.  Rich or poor, in power or out of power, obedience to citizenship duty, at all costs 
and risks, is the essence of civilized life.   
  
Spirit of Harmony and Dignity of Women   
   
3.39.1    Some further thought needs to be given to clauses (e) and (f) of article 51A. Article 
51A(e) desires the promotion of harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood among all the 
people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities and 
renunciation of practices derogatory to the dignity of women. It is couched in broad terms but it 
should be clear that attacks on minority communities or minority opinions are frowned upon. 
Respect for both are essential and the wording lends support to a broad humanis m to cover such 
differences as may exist or better still, co -exist. Two thoughts can be distilled. The first is that 
the objective will not be reached unless there is a determined effort to restrict religious practices to the home on the justified premise that one‟s religion is a personal matter and is not conducive 
to mass assertiveness. The other is the status of women.  
  
3.39.2    Lip service is being paid to the doctrine of gender equality.  The fact remains that 
generally women are still regarded as in ferior both at home and workplace although the 
Commission has noticed an improvement, however dissatisfied it may be with the degree of the 
improvement.  
  
3.39.3    It is necessary to separate religious precepts from civil law. Civil law as the name 
implie s is a matter for society not for religious leaders and it would seem to us to be axiomatic 
that in matters of civil rights, laws of property and inheritance and marriage and divorce, 
although practices may differ, legal rights that accrue must be the same . For example, a marriage 
may be solemnised according to religious or social custom but the rights of a woman in the case 
of divorce must be the same no matter what her religion is. As the Supreme Court held in the 
Shahbanoo case , an abandoned wife is an abandoned wife and it does not matter whether she 
professes one religion or another. She is entitled to alimony. Progress in these directions will be 
slow but it is necessary that progress is seen to be made.  The key lies in education.  
  
3.39.4    Clause ( e) of article 51A also seems to cover the need to regard all human beings 
equally. In this connection, it is necessary to consider the question of the uplift ment of the 
Scheduled Castes and other disadvantaged sections of our society. The scourge must be 
eradicated. The Constitution gave us ten years to do the job; the provision has been extended to 
fifty years and we are in our sixth ten -year period but we are no nearer the goal. The 
discrimination is two -fold. It is economic -condemning whole sections of our society numbering 
millions to menial jobs as part of the evil of treating them as sub -human.  We have provided for 
reservation of jobs to these people, we have even given them separate constituencies to represent 
them. It has created a vested interest in backwardness. The other adverse result is that it has had 
no effect on their status in society, which continues to be determined by birth and not human 
worth and human personality. It is this social stigma which still plagues our people and the 
struggle  to restore to them basic human dignity has made no significant progress. While the 
Commission appreciates the context in which affirmative action became necessary, it feels that 
reservation of jobs and seats in the legislatures will not help this aspect o f the matter.  
  
3.39.5    It is quite clear to the Commission that the disease of considering human beings as high 
or low based on the accident of birth is a disease rooted in the mind and it is in the mind that the 
defences of a society based on human dign ity and equality must be constructed. Logically this 
leads directly to the conclusion that the key lies in education. The time to begin training our 
young people to respect the National flag and sing the National anthem, to respect women, to 
hold all relig ions equal and deserving of as much respect as one‟s own, to accept that all human beings are born equal and are entitled to equal treatment are among principles best taught by 
examples when the child is too young to understand but not too young to obey. T he focus must, 
therefore, shift to education which has suffered from serious neglect. Schools restrict admissions 
on unacceptable criteria, teachers themselves are untrained and often politicised, as is the 
curriculum. Despite these hardships, many of our young people have done well.  
  
Composite culture   
  
3.40.1  Clause (f) of article 51A requires us to value and preserve the rich heritage of our 
composite culture. It follows that we may not break each other‟s places of worship, set fire to 
religious texts,  or beat up one another‟s priests or obstruct those who exercise their Fundamental 
Right under article 25 to profess, practice and propagate religion. Composite culture means 
culture drawn from many strands. Here again education in its broadest and best se nse can 
provide the corrective to the aberrations that have occurred.  
  
3.40.2   Education is not confined only to the time spent in schools and colleges. Education 
begins at birth in the subconscious and continues till death. Anyone who says that he has no thing 
more to learn is already brain -dead. It follows that the influences that play on a child at home are 
of great importance. Parents should understand that education begins at home, the examples they 
set, the environment of enlightenment and tolerance t hat is necessary to produce good citizens 
cannot be sub -contracted to formal schooling important though this is. Schemes should, 
therefore, be framed that include parents in social activities that have as their objective the 
country‟s age -old traditions, i ts welcome to the persecuted of every faith, its virtues of tolerance 
of and respect for all religions and a certain pride in belonging to this land and in being 
considered as Indian. The highest office in our democracy is the office of citizen; this is no t only 
a platitude, it must translate into reality. The distinction is not illusory. This country has given far 
too much indulgence to an attitude of mind that acts on the question  - what is there in it for me? 
Education and the process of inculcating uns elfishness and a sense of obligation to one‟s 
fellowmen should inspire the question – where does my duty lie? The transformation has the 
potential to make our nation strong, invincible and able to command the respect of the world.  
  
3.40.3  (i) The Commission recommends that the first and foremost step required by the 
Union and State Governments is to sensitise the people and to create a general awareness of the provisions of fundamental duties amongst the citizens on the lines recommended by t he 
Justice Verma Committee   
18 on the subject. Consideration should be given to the ways and means by which 
Fundamental Duties could be popularized and made effective; (ii) right to freedom of 
religion and other freedoms must be jealously guarded and right s of minorities and fellow 
citizens respected;  (iii) reform of the whole process of education is an immediate but 
immense need, as is the need to free it from governmental or political control; it is only 
through education that will power to adhere to our  Fundamental Duties as citizens can be 
inculcated; and (iv) duty to vote at elections, actively participate in the democratic process 
of governance and to pay taxes should be included in article 51A. The Commission fully 
endorses the other recommendations of the Justice Verma Committee on operationalisation 
of Fundamental Duties of Citizens and strongly suggests their early implementation.  
  
3.40.4  The Commission also recommends that the following should be incorporated as 
fundamental duties in article 51A of the Constitution - 
  
(i)                             To foster a spirit of family values and responsible parenthood in the 
matter of education, physical and moral well -being of children.  
  
(ii)                            Duty of industrial organizations to provide education to children of 
their employees  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                                                           
18 See Annexure 1 to the Consultation Paper on „Effectuation of Fundament al Duties of Citizens‟ in Volume - II (Book 1) of the Report.    
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 